Good afternoon.
How is everyone doing?
Show of hands,
how many people are first conference?
Wow.
How many people have used
Instruments even once?
Whoa.
Impressive.
So we're here to talk
about learning Instruments.
I've had the pleasure of
working with most of you in the
lab for the past couple days.
We'll be in labs for
the rest of the week.
But let's get started.
What are you going to go over today?
First, we're going to go over
elements of performance.
This is important to set baseline and
for us to figure out what we're talking
about and what sorts of things we're
going to optimize our applications for.
We're going to give you a
methodology for performance.
This is a technique that's proven,
a technique I've gone over with many
of you in the labs that have come
and spoke with us and the rest of
the Instruments team all this week.
We're going to give you a
brief tour of Instruments,
although with the number
of people already seen it,
maybe I should cut that part out.
But, and then we have some excellent
iOS optimization demonstrations.
We made an app special
for the conference.
We have a few interesting problems.
And we'll show you how you can use
Instruments to find those problems.
I think you'll relate to
these problems and you'll find
them to be very interesting.
What is performance?
This seems fairly obvious.
The first one is probably a gimme,
but we'll start there.
We all want our application to be fast.
That's fairly obvious.
But what some people don't
think of sometimes is we also
want it to be responsive.
And lastly, we want it to be efficient.
So you can use Instruments to
accomplish all of these goals.
And there's an interesting side effect.
If you focus on these three elements,
you also tend to save battery life.
And we're working with mobile devices.
Our customers expect and demand that our
applications don't drain their battery.
So, if you use Instruments to
profile your application,
you'll be able to also
optimize for battery life.
If you don't use Instruments
to profile your application,
this might be one of
your app review comments.
Or this one.
And most certainly,
this will be your rating.
So we consider performance a
feature of your application.
It's just as important as
what your application does.
Use Xcode to author and
build your application.
Use Interface Builder to
put the bits on the screen,
decide how your layouts are going to be.
Use Instruments to
profile your application.
It's just as important as the compile.
It's just as important
as Interface Builder.
You use it to optimize your performance.
You can use it to reduce
crashes and terminations.
And you can use it to
improve your power usage.
Thank you.
What is the process?
I've had a lot of you come to
the lab this week and said,
"What should I do?" And we have a
really excellent example in my opinion.
A lot of you are familiar
with debugging your computer,
and when you're debugging your computer,
when you're debugging your app,
you reproduce your problem.
You then use the debugger to
inspect the code and you maybe
add some logging messages.
Based on what you see in the debugger,
you form a hypothesis.
"Hey, if I make this change,
my app's going to stop crashing."
You then actually make the change.
and reproduce the problem.
Well,
the profile process is nearly identical.
But instead of debugging a problem,
we're going to measure the problem.
So you have an area of your
application that's going a little slow.
Reproduce the slowness.
Use Instruments to profile
your application while
you're doing the slowness.
Use the data Instruments showing you
in order to form a hypothesis about
what you could do differently in your
application that might speed the code up.
Make the change that
you hypothesized about.
And most importantly,
go back and measure that you
actually improved the situation.
The number of people who sometimes
don't do this is interesting.
Where can I find Instruments?
Well, the good news is you don't
have to do anything else.
It's included with Xcode.
All of you who have Xcode on your
hard drive right now have Instruments.
We've given you at least
two ways to access it.
There's more,
but we'll go over the top two.
The first way is under the Xcode menu.
You can use open developer tools.
And it's so important,
it's the first application listed.
There's also the profile
command under the Run menu,
or under the Project menu under Run.
Profile is one of my favorite features
of Instruments because what it
actually does is launches Instruments,
pre-targets your application,
and will actually stop and start
your application as you start
and stop traces in Instruments,
which you'll see later.
So this is the easiest way
to get into Instruments.
We have a little pro tip here.
When Instruments is running,
it's actually a separate app bundle.
It shows up in the dock.
You can right-click on the dock icon and
choose to keep Instruments in the dock
so that you always have quick access
to it to profile your applications.
So we're going to give you a brief
tour right now on the screen behind me.
Instruments is a document model.
What that means is when
you launch Instruments,
we ask you to pick a template,
much like Keynote asks
you to pick something,
Pages asks you to pick a template.
But Instruments templates are
common profiling operations
that you'd want to perform.
What you see on the screen is time
profile leaks and allocations.
Once you pick a template,
you now have what we
call a trace document.
And all of the data that you record
will go into that trace document and
you can save it after you've made
your recording and review it later
or review it right after you're done.
So it's a document model,
standard document window, fairly common.
Once you have the document window open,
there are several elements on the screen,
and we're going to tour these elements
on the screen so that all of you have
an idea what function they perform.
There's a toolbar, which lets you control
recordings and such.
I'll go into more detail on that later.
The left-hand side we
call the Strategy section.
These are what instruments
you've added to your document.
Normally what's there is what you
selected when you picked a template,
but you can actually customize that
and add any instrument you want.
There's a Timeline view.
This is where we will show the
time-based data of what we were recording
over time from your application.
At the bottom, there's a Details section.
This is really interesting.
There's all sorts of interesting
information shows up here.
But what's most interesting is the
Details section automatically configures
itself and customizes itself to show
the most relevant information based on
the instrument that you used to record.
For example, when doing a time profile,
we get CPU usage,
but when doing allocations,
you get the amount of memory
that's been allocated,
as shown in the Details section.
section.
and the extended detail section
is also very powerful and can
occasionally illuminate data that's
hard to see in the detail section.
All of these will be used
in the demonstration.
I think you'll enjoy
seeing what they can do.
The toolbar is fairly important.
The first and most important menu in the
toolbar is what are you going to target?
Now, all processes is something we
do at Apple because we want to
profile the entire operating system,
but most of you are app developers.
And so it's important for you to
pick your application from the target
menu before you start recording.
In this case, we're picking Safari,
and I'm going to profile Safari and see
if I can give the team some feedback.
After you've picked your target,
you can use the record button
to start and stop a trace.
This will allow you to get
your application launched,
get to where you want
to do the profile step,
start recording, go reproduce the problem
with your application.
When the problem reproduces,
you come back to your stop the recording,
and now you have a precise trace
of what you were trying to analyze
or what you were trying to profile.
We have a timeline,
and this lets you set start
and end points on the timeline.
Sometimes you have too much data,
sometimes the data is too
small or too compressed.
You can use these controls
to zoom in on the timeline,
pick a range of the timeline so
that you can focus on just the
data that's most relevant to you.
This is a time window.
It shows you how long the trace data is,
how much trace data you have,
how many runs you have.
One of my other favorite features is
you can run a trace multiple times,
and Instruments lets you compare
multiple runs side by side.
Instruments is a pained window,
so you can actually choose
what panes are showing.
What's highlighted here is
the left-hand side is shown.
The bottom and the
extended detail are hidden.
You can click on that to use your
screen real estate appropriately
to show more or less data based
on what you want to achieve.
and the library.
The library window lets you show
other Instruments that maybe weren't
part of the template and add them
to the strategy section so that you
could maybe combine file I/O tracing
along with your CPU load tracing and
see if your file I/O has something
to do with your CPU load problems.
This is a sample timeline
of a time profile I took of
Safari reloading the Apple website
over and over and over again.
The purple lines are CPU load.
and you can see this is, you know,
it's a timeline from left to right.
The three buttons above the time profile
icon are what we call the strategy view.
And the strategy view you're
seeing here is the instrument view.
And what we mean by that is this
is the way the instrument has
chosen to represent its data.
Different instruments will
draw the timeline differently.
This instrument has an alternate view.
This actually lets you see
all of the threads that your
application was running.
And each one of those little stopwatches
on there represents a different sample
from where instruments took a sample.
And that represents an entire
backtrace at that point in time
of where your application was
executing when we took that sample.
This is very useful for debugging
concurrency problems or optimizing
performance where you can see how the
threads are interacting and ping-ponging.
The last strategy view in Time Profile
is the Core Strategy View or
the CPU Strategy View.
And this lets you show what CPUs
your process was actually scheduled
on by the operating system.
This lets you see how much
parallelism you're actually achieving.
If you've optimized your
code and choose parallel,
what you should see is activity on
all of the cores simultaneously,
and we'll have a
demonstration of that later.
The timeline can be filtered.
We've switched here from a time
profiler view to a system trace view,
and you can see the data
is presented differently.
The highlighted section there
I used by shift-clicking,
and that allows me to zoom in on that
section and see the data in more detail.
In this view is the
detail pan at the bottom.
You can see what we call a call tree.
This is probably the most,
the bread and butter data
that Instruments presents.
When Instruments runs,
most of the time we're sampling a
backtrace and we have the actual
symbol from when we took a sample
of your application of what it
was doing at that exact second.
We sort, sift,
and present all of that information
to you in the detail view.
And we can normally show you the
line of code that allocated too much
memory or took too much CPU time
or was on the CPU too frequently.
The call tree views
in the detail section,
as you can see here on the screen.
And what you're seeing here on the screen
is main thread took 53.6% of our time.
We could drill down there and find
out more details about why main thread
was taking up that much of our time.
I can change the views in the jump
bar by choosing a pop-up view,
and you can see the actual
samples that we took.
Again,
what's on screen is 0 through 7 and 8.
There's probably 10,000,
12,000 samples in this list,
but this is the actual
data that we sampled.
Sometimes if the data's not being
illuminated in the call tree view,
you can plow through the
detail view yourself and
find interesting information.
We can also show you your
source code in this view.
So you can double click on a call tree,
click on the focus icon,
and we'll actually show you the code.
What this window is showing us is
that G-Lunar texture was 75% of the
samples in this particular case.
And if that was a problem for you,
you'd know that that was the
line of code to work or replace
or find something different.
This is the extended detail view.
It sometimes shows information
that's more succinct or more precise.
And you can see here that
for this particular sample,
75% of the time was at
the value texture line,
and the other 25% was spent
doing S print F buffer.
We can also show you the disassembly.
There are some cases where you have
handwritten assembly code or you
have instruction scheduling issues,
and you can use Instruments
to find out what instructions
are taking most of the time.
This is a system call
view with a detailed pane.
This is showing us that Mach timer
arm is taking 57% of our time.
And you can see that the
timeline is radically different.
Each of the samples on the
timeline above with the little
telephone represents a system call.
And I can actually get a back
trace of what my code was doing
when it made that system call.
If you're getting a
stall with a system call,
you could actually see what part
of your program was causing that.
Next slide.
There we go.
And this is just another example
of the variability in Instruments
display and the flexibility in that
we can show the activity monitor,
which provides an excellent summary.
In this case,
the Galaxy's program was the
lion's share of the CPU time,
and we have user load, system load,
and various size and VM size
information up on screen.
So Instruments is very flexible,
very versatile.
We can show you data in
a lot of different ways.
And at this time,
I'd like to bring Joe Grzywak on stage
and quit talking about screenshots and
actually show you how to use Instruments
to optimize an actual application.
Thank you.
Thank you, Dave.
Hello, my name is Joe Grzywacz.
I'm an engineer on the
Performance Tools team.
And today I want to take you
through using Time Profiler template
in order to optimize an example
application we wrote for you today.
Okay, so we're going to get right to it,
launch our project in Xcode.
Now,
the first thing we're going to do when
we're running with Time Profiler is
make sure you're targeting your device.
Running on the simulator will show
completely different performance
characteristics as you're running on
your local host instead of the device.
So make sure we have
our iPad here targeted.
Click and hold on Run.
Choose Profile.
That'll build our
application in release mode.
That's important.
We want to make sure we're optimizing
the release bits that we're going
to be giving to our customers.
That'll sync to the device,
and up will pop the
Instruments template chooser.
Here we're going to be selecting
the Time Profiler template,
as I have some performance
problems I want to investigate.
So we'll choose Profile.
Up immediately will pop Instruments,
and it's recording data in real time
for us and updating the timeline,
so as I interact with the application,
I get data feedback right away.
I've stopped this recording because
I want to actually take this time
to switch a recording option.
You can do this by selecting in
the Time Profiler instrument,
this little eye icon is your inspector.
Open this up,
we see some recording options.
We're going to select
Record Waiting Threads,
and we'll get to why we did
that in just a little while.
For now,
since we haven't made any code changes,
you can actually just use the record
button right from Instruments.
It'll launch your application once again.
First,
I would like to go to the iPad device.
We can see that.
And now I will press
record within Instruments.
And...
All right.
So we see our app came up.
Once again,
I'm going to tap on the top paid ocean,
and we're going to have
to refetch that RSS down,
that feed, as we do that each time.
Instruments is providing me with
real-time data here that I can
see and you'll see in a moment.
And while the application is running,
let me describe to you what it's doing.
So it downloaded the RSS feed.
It's going to start drawing
some icons across the screen.
In order to do that,
it's going to go out to the internet,
download the icons.
And you can see we're actually running
here at a pretty miserable frame rate,
something like five frames per second.
Now I'm expecting 60 frames per second.
When I wrote the application,
I created a timer,
fire 60 times per second,
should call into my main thread,
wake it up,
move all the icons across the screen,
and then draw the screen
and go back to sleep.
We can see here we have some
icons moving across the screen.
There's some schools of icons.
There's parents with their
children following behind them.
And we're trying to collect
enough data here that we can
actually analyze this problem.
And so we're getting to a
point here where actually,
OK, we got to another phase
where we're actually running
a little bit more smoothly,
but still only at 12.5 frames per second.
And that's what we want to
actually analyze at this point.
So we're turning now to Instruments.
Here's what Instruments has
been recording this entire time.
I'm going to stop the recording,
as I have enough data.
[Transcript missing]
For now, I'm only interested in
what's taking all this time.
And so I'm going to, on the left side,
choose this running sample times
option in the sample perspective area.
And what that will do is temporarily
just kind of put aside all
those background samples we got.
So now we have something
like 3,300 samples.
Now, what is taking all of our time?
Well, if you click and hold in
the ruler view up here,
we can see that we're
using 100% of our CPU,
80% of our CPU.
This little inspection head, it's called,
will actually tell you how much CPU time
you're using at the current moment.
Okay,
so we seem to be using a lot of our CPU.
Our frame rate's low.
I'm going to, you know,
conjecture that I have a
frame rate problem caused by,
you know, overuse of my CPU.
So where's all that time going?
Well,
the answer is here in the sample list,
but it's kind of completely
unusable for humans,
which is why we provide
you the call tree view,
which is the default view you get
to because that's where you're
going to want to spend your time.
Now, we have a call tree for each thread.
I'm going to go ahead and open
up a couple of these entries.
So what exactly is a call tree?
Well,
we took all those samples we took and
all those backtraces and found all the
unique paths through those backtraces,
combined them together into
a single tree structure.
So we can see here our main thread
called down into the symbol main.
The gray text to the side is
either your program name or
the system library you're in.
Here we started in my AppOcean program.
And now when we generated that call tree,
we also generated how much time was
spent in those sections of the call tree.
Here we can see we spent
31,190 milliseconds,
or 94% of our total samples were in
our main symbol and its children.
And so we can continue moving down here.
Main called into UI application main.
That was in the UI kit framework.
UI application main actually went
in and called two different symbols,
gseventrunmodal,
as well as uiapplication_run.
So how do we know where we should
continue drilling down now that we've
hit actually one of these branch points?
Well, simply just follow the big number.
Here we have 86% of our time went
down this portion of the call tree,
and so we're going to keep
on opening up each of these
and continue following down.
Now, there's a quicker way.
To do that, and that's in the toolbar,
is opening up that
extended detail view again.
This time,
it has the heaviest stack trace for us.
What we see here is the exact same
thing we were seeing in the main window,
the main area in the detail pane,
that main called UI application main,
et cetera.
The gray text here, system libraries,
the black text, your code.
Great way to go through this
quickly is just go ahead and
scroll all the way to the bottom,
and then kind of scan your
way back up until you start
seeing the black text again,
which is your code.
Here I'm going to go ahead and
click on Ocean View Draw Icons.
And that highlighted that symbol
in our call tree area over here.
And what can we see?
Well, UI views,
draw layer and context called my code,
AppOcean's code,
draw icons as well as draw rect.
And between these two guys,
we spent about almost 80% of our time.
So I know if we optimize this code,
we should see potentially
a very large speedup.
You can go ahead and see your source
code right within Instruments.
Double-click the symbol.
and your source code will show up
right inside the detail pane of
Instruments for quick reference.
And here,
if you're particularly eagle-eyed,
you may have noticed
something interesting.
I have my draw record routine,
which calls into both draw
background and draw icons.
However, back in my call tree view,
We saw that it looked like that
draw icons routine was actually a
child of this draw layer in context.
Looks like he was called directly.
That's not the case.
What you're seeing is the fact that
we ran in release mode is the compiler
is performing a lot of optimizations.
One of them is called the
tail call elimination.
So sometimes you'll encounter
this where it may look like your
frames are slightly out of order.
That's a compiler optimization.
So I know that, in fact,
my draw rect routine actually
did use 80% of the time.
So I can double click on the symbol
again to go see that source code.
And let's say I want to go change it.
In the top section here
of the detail pane,
there's a tiny Xcode icon.
Click on him.
Xcode will come up and it'll go actually
right to our source code for us.
You can go ahead and
start making your changes.
So this is the first point where
I actually would want to make my change.
I know that this draw rect routine
and all of these methods above it
that it's calling are really slow,
and so I'm going to get rid of them.
The fix here,
if you read a bunch of documentation,
is to use another technology
called Core Animation.
Now, we don't have time to get into
all the details of Core Animation.
It's a really cool technology,
but it's going to move all this
redundant CPU calculation off to the GPU,
which is really good at it.
And so we'll deal with
actually fixing that up later,
but all that old code
is going to be gone.
So we're turning to Instruments.
There was one other thing
I wanted to look at before
I made any of those code changes.
And, well, that was,
we actually seem to have two different
kind of regimes in this application here,
where at the end we saw a
pretty solid purple bar,
and then kind of in the middle
we see lots of peaks and valleys,
peaks and valleys.
And so I want to know
what's going on there.
Underneath this Instruments list,
there's a widget called
the Track Scale Slider.
You can drag it to the left,
it'll zoom out slowly.
Drag it back to the right,
it'll zoom in slowly.
And so right now I'm interested in
why do I have all of these gaps?
Now, normally, when you have a gap,
that might be okay.
If you have nothing to do
on your CPU and it's idle,
it's a good thing.
You're saving power.
Here, however,
I have this 60 hertz timer firing,
and I'm expecting my main thread to wake
up 60 times a second and do some work.
We see here between 41 and 42 seconds.
We actually see only maybe
it looks like one peak.
We only had one thing wake up.
So the question is, well,
what was my main thread
doing at that time?
And Instruments provides a great way to
actually answer that question by going
over here to the top left of Instruments
and switching away from the default view,
which is the Instruments strategy,
and selecting the third icon here,
which is the Thread strategy.
What happens now is that list of
instruments has been replaced with a list
of all the threads in your application.
We have a bunch of them here.
Some of that background
RSS feeding and whatnot.
We're interested in what
my main thread was doing,
and I've highlighted it here.
And now, as Dave mentioned,
there's a whole bunch of these
little icons going across the screen.
Those are the samples that we took.
Some are darker and some
are lighter than others.
The darker ones are when we took
a sample of something that was
running on the CPU at that time,
which is the default
mode for Time Profiler.
We have these semi-transparent icons,
and those represent the samples of
your application when it was not
running on any CPU at that time.
We got those because we enabled
that record waiting threads option
at the beginning of the demo.
Now, I did that to save us a
couple minutes of demo time.
If you didn't have that option enabled,
you'd see gaps in these regions instead
of those semi-transparent icons.
And what you would do is just go back,
enable that option, do another recording.
Not a big deal.
And so now what I should be able
to do is click on one of these
particular semi-transparent guys.
And now with one click,
I've answered the question of, well,
what was my main thread
doing at this time?
Because we can see we took
an idle call stack sample.
Our CPU ID is, well,
not running on a CPU because
it was in the background.
And we have the call stack here.
And if we just scroll down it,
we see the black text is my code.
Some sort of icon
downloader start download.
That went and called
into NSURL connection
send synchronous request.
And so right there, I know the problem.
I did a synchronous request out
to the Internet on my main thread,
and that's going to block
everything from happening.
Your user can't interact.
There's no responsiveness
to the user for touches.
The screen won't be animating,
and you won't even get timer
firings until this data comes back.
And so it's obviously
a performance issue,
but it could be worse than that.
If you make this Internet connection and
it doesn't come back within 10 seconds,
the system's going to terminate your
application because you took too long,
and your user's going to see
what appears to be a crash.
So make sure to move all of these
synchronous requests off to a
background thread using one of
the asynchronous APIs we provide.
Okay,
so that's two problems and two fixes.
There's one final thing
I want to look at,
and that is going back to the
Instruments Strategy View.
We can go ahead and quickly
zoom back out using the View,
Snap, Track to Fit menu item.
And what that'll do is go ahead and,
you know, bring all the samples back
into view really quickly.
And now I want to focus in on this
startup time here at the beginning.
And so using a shift
and mouse drag gesture,
I'll quickly just zoom in on that region.
And so now what we're looking
at is my startup time.
We can go ahead and drag
this a little bit larger.
And so what I want to do now is
option drag over this region,
and that's going to do two things.
This little pop over here is
telling me that it's taking 2.85
seconds to do my startup routine.
And when I let go,
I've now applied a time filter.
Now, for temporarily,
all the samples outside of
this highlighted blue range,
we're just ignoring them.
It's very easy to clear it.
They're using that inspection
range in the toolbar.
You can go ahead again and set it to
any ranges you want really quickly,
pretty easy.
And so now what we've done
is highlighted this region,
and now I want to go back and see what
was actually taking our time again.
So using the jump bar,
we're going to click on call tree again.
This has now been updated
with just the samples that
are in this particular range.
And as we did before, very quickly,
go to the extended detail view.
And we have a very long call tree here.
And what we see here at the bottom is
some of my routines at the very bottom.
I'm going to click on that.
And now it's highlighted
here in the call tree for us.
Let's get this up a little bit.
And what are we seeing here?
The view loaded,
and I did some compositing of
images that took 70% of my time.
There was some loading of images
that took another 27% of my time.
So once again,
I have about 98% of my time
was spent in these functions.
And you'd want to go
through the same routine of,
well, let's try to optimize that.
Unfortunately, let's say I tried that,
I couldn't get out any more time,
and so the code is what it is.
I can't make it any more efficient.
Or can I?
Well, the last thing we want to look at
is the third and final strategy,
which is the CPU strategy.
When we click on that,
now our list of instruments is replaced
with the list of cores in my device.
This is an iPad 2, so there's two cores.
And what we can see now
is these blue sample bars.
Each blue sample bar
represents a different CPU.
And so we took a sample
on that particular core.
The height of it represents
the depth of the backtrace.
And if you take a really quick glance,
you may say, yes, we actually have some
parallelism going on here.
In fact, we don't.
We can grab that same inspection
head before and kind of help
us draw a vertical line and see
that any time there's a blue bar
on one core or the other core,
but never at the same time.
So we actually are making only,
using 50% of our CPU resources,
we can actually make this much more
efficient by doing some work in parallel.
So the code change that I need
to make is to take that daytime
and nighttime loading of images
and do them at the same time.
And then break up those images
into a bunch of tiles and use GCD,
Grand Central Dispatch,
to actually create a whole bunch
of threads in the background to
work on those tiles in parallel
and then display them to the user.
Now, I did one other final enhancement
to that was that as soon
as the daytime image loads,
I can display that to the user
immediately so they can begin
interacting with the application
as quickly as possible.
Meanwhile, all those computations will be
happening in the background and will
show up for the user as they complete.
So now we're going to Xcode.
As promised, start making some of
these coding changes.
Except I'm going to take the cooking
show approach and cheat a little bit.
As these changes take
a little while to make,
so I've prepared some pound
of fines ahead of time.
First one is let's go ahead
and use Core Animation.
That removes all our draw rect code.
It enables us to use the
CA layer type technology.
Again, I would recommend you go
see a Core Animation talk
to learn more about that.
The second fix was let's do all of
our icon downloading asynchronously,
get it off the main thread.
And third and finally,
let's rewrite that initial map
loading algorithm to actually do
things more in parallel and use GCD.
So save those changes.
And this time I want to make sure
to select Profile from within Xcode.
Since we have coding changes,
we need to make sure we profile sync
the latest bits over to the device.
So before I do that,
let's go back to the iPad.
Okay.
So now I'll select Profile
again within Xcode.
It's compiling,
syncing it over to the device.
And this time we see the daytime
image comes up really quickly.
The nighttime image
blends in the background.
The entire time, the user interface was
interactive for the user.
I can tap on the top paid ocean.
And again, it's going to go out,
load that RSS feed again for us.
And after it does that,
the icon should start downloading.
And now we can see my frames per
second counter is actually running
at 60 frames this entire time.
I don't see any random stutters.
The children are following
their parents quite nicely.
And everything looks great.
I'm pretty sure I've verified that
I've actually fixed the problem.
But what does Instruments
have to say about it?
Returning to Instruments.
Let me see what the graph looks like now.
Our CPU usage is much lower.
And so that looks great.
We can drag the inspection head
even while it's running and see
that 30%, 20%, much lower CPU usage.
Great.
Stop this recording.
The last thing I wanted to
look at was that startup time.
Shift-drag to zoom in on that.
I can go ahead now and once
again do the option drag,
which will time filter this region
as well as let me measure it.
The duration now is down
to about 1.7 seconds,
so we took off a little over a second.
And did we do this more efficiently?
This time we can see that in
our core strategy view that,
yes, indeed,
we actually have samples now running
on both of our cores at the same time.
And that's where we got that big
speed up as we were using both
of our cores' top efficiency.
The last thing I'd like to show you
is the all-new threads and process
picker that we have this year.
We open that up.
The left box actually lists all
the processes that we recorded.
We only recorded our one application,
so there's just one.
The left panel shows us all the
different threads that were actually
involved in our process this time.
There's a bunch here,
and there's some quick shortcuts to say,
if I want to focus in on my main thread,
click the main thread filter,
check that box, and now we'll be focusing
in on just our main thread.
So when I return to
this core strategy view,
we can see the blue samples
now are our main thread.
All the gray samples was
all that background code,
all the compositing logic
that GCD is handling for us.
And if I option drag over this region,
and I'll see the duration
was 413 milliseconds.
So the user was able to start tapping,
interacting with my application
in under half a second versus
the almost three seconds before.
And with that,
I'll turn to slides and summarize
what we just went through.
Thank you.
So the first thing we did was
actually want to analyze where
we were spending all our time.
And that's what the call
tree view is really good for.
It took us a matter of a minute
to just find these two methods,
in this case, drawIcons and drawRect,
that were taking most of our time.
We went and optimized those away.
Then we had a responsiveness problem
where our main thread wasn't responding.
It was hanging a little bit.
And we went to the thread strategy,
which very quickly allowed us to see
that I was actually doing this blocking
synchronous call on my main thread.
And that's where those little
hangs were coming from.
And third,
we went and used the CPU Strategy View.
That told us how efficiently
we were doing our work.
Here, we weren't actually doing
it efficiently at all.
We were only using half of our resources.
So we went back in,
made our code more parallel, used GCD,
and then we used all of our CPU cores.
And with that,
I'd like to introduce Victor Hernandez,
who's going to take you through
a memory profiling optimization
on the same application.
Thank you.
Thanks, Joe.
My name is Victor Hernandez,
and I'll be showing you how
to use Instruments to fix
memory issues in your app.
It's really important that you do
this because memory is a shared,
constrained resource on the device.
And fortunately,
Instruments provides tools
that makes this easier to do.
I'll be going over two tools,
the leaks instrument and
the allocations instrument.
So let me go to the demo machine.
Here we go.
I'm going to bring this up in Xcode.
Okay.
So I have it running on the iPad.
That's great.
I'm going to check the
profile action here.
And unlike Joe, I'm not going to be using
the time profiler template,
but instead I'm going to be choosing
right here the leaks template.
So let me choose that
and click on profile.
This launches Instruments,
and it's already started recording.
So I'm going to start using the app and
using it just bringing up some oceans.
Here I'm bringing up the first ocean.
I'm going to wait until a
few apps are swimming around,
and I basically want to exercise the
app like your user would be doing.
All right,
I have a few oceans swimming around.
That's great.
Let me swipe away and
bring up another ocean.
And you'll see it's still
collecting more information.
And I'm waiting for that
ocean to be filled with apps.
Let's see, it's taking a little while
to download our assess feed.
Oh, wait a second.
I should stop this right away.
Because if you'll notice right here,
if you look at the reason
I stopped immediately is because
the leaks instrument is already
showing me that I have some leaks.
What this means is that there is some
memory that is not accessible for my app,
yet has not been freed.
This is an issue that needs to
be resolved as soon as possible,
and I want to start there.
So how I go about doing this is
first I need to find out what the
information that it's showing me is.
If I go over here on the left-hand side,
you will see--
It says right here that the leaks
instrument is doing automatic
snapshotting every 10 seconds and
What that's showing me means is that this
is the first time it detected any leaks,
and it detected 220 leaks,
and about 10 seconds later,
it then detected 304 leaks.
All right,
so I'm leaking about 15 kilobytes,
and I need to take care of that.
Now, the way I go about doing that is
right here in the detail view.
I have the different categories
of objects that are being leaked.
If I organize this,
I should start by looking
at objects from my own app.
The ones I notice here are
app child and app parent.
As Joe mentioned,
when the apps are swimming
around in the oceans,
we have some of them that
are leading other apps.
Those are the parents,
and they're leading their
little school of fish,
and that's the app child.
Well, it looks like some of
these are being leaked.
In fact,
I have 79 app childs being leaked
and 28 app parents being leaked.
Now, I'm rather surprised that
they're being leaked because
I wrote this code using Arc.
Aren't I supposed to avoid
these sorts of issues?
Well,
even though Arc makes it much easier to
write retain and release memory apps,
you can still fall into the same
pitfalls that you did before
with that kind of technology.
Fortunately, Instruments makes it pretty
easy to identify one of the
common sources of leaked memory,
which is a retain cycle.
And the way you find this information
is you go right here in the jump bar
and you choose cycles and routes.
And so what you have here is what
Instruments has recorded for you are
all of the different cycles and routes.
Specifically,
I want to go to my App Parent,
the objects for my own code,
and it brings up this graph.
What we're seeing here is we're seeing
a reference graph for the App Parent.
The App Parent has this red arrow,
and the red arrow indicates that
there is a strong ARC reference
from the App Parent to a mutable
array for its children property.
That mutable array has a blue dotted
non-ARC reference to a buffer,
and then that buffer has another
non-ARC reference to an app child.
And finally,
this app child has a red strong
reference back to its parent that's
stored in its parent property.
Well, that's really surprising.
I didn't expect this to be
a strong reference at all.
The other thing I want to point out is,
as I told you earlier,
this memory isn't accessible
from the rest of your app,
and sure enough,
there are no references to this
App Parent from anywhere else.
They're only from the app child.
So I need to find out why
this is a strong reference,
even though I didn't expect it to be.
So if I double-click on that arrow,
it takes me to Xcode,
and it'll actually take me to
the definition of app child.
Here we go.
Here is the line where I'm setting
the parent property in app child.
Nothing looks wrong about that.
So let me actually go to the
header and see what's going on.
Now if I scroll down to
the property declaration,
aha, I see what's going on.
I forgot that by default,
properties are declared
to have strong references,
and I in fact need to explicitly
state that this is a weak reference.
So I think that should fix my leak,
and now I need to run again
in Instruments to verify
that I've in fact done that,
fixed the leak.
In the interest of time,
I'm going to be...
I'm going to be loading
a pre-saved trace.
So let me go ahead and save this one.
And here's my pre-saved trace.
And so this is now Instruments
recording data running through
multiple oceans in my app.
After I fix the leak.
Well, first of all,
I'll notice that the leaks
timeline shows no leaks at all.
So I think I fixed the problem.
That's great.
Now what's the next thing I need to do?
Well, I need to go to the allocations
timeline and see if it's telling me that
there's something that I need to fix.
Before I do that,
I want to show you that I've added
these flags throughout the timeline.
These are really useful for correlating
behavior in the app to data that's
been collected inside of Instruments.
You'll see right here,
I've labeled this flag
to say map of the world,
and in fact,
it's the point in time when the app
has brought up the map of the world.
My next flag identifies
that at this point in time,
the top paid ocean has
been displayed once,
and there's a whole bunch
of apps swimming in there.
And then I have one for
the new paid app ocean,
and then finally, I brought up the top
paid app ocean again.
It's pretty easy to add
these flags to your trace.
You just move the inspection
head anywhere along the
timeline and go to edit,
add flag.
It adds it,
and then if you double click on it,
you can go ahead and
put a label in there,
which you can reference later.
I'm going to go ahead and
remove this since we're not
actually going to use that one.
But this is really useful,
especially if you save your trace and you
want to access that information later.
So let me go to view,
snap track to fit to make this
thing take up the whole screen.
Okay, great.
Now that we know what our
app is doing over time,
we need to see what
its memory profile is.
So the allocations instrument
in the timeline shows you the
amount of memory used by all of
the malloc objects in your heap.
Initially,
when the map of the world was shown,
I'm using about 910 kilobytes.
And by the time I bring
up the first ocean,
I'm using 3 megabytes.
And on the second ocean,
I'm using 4.56 megabytes.
And finally, I'm up to 6.38 megabytes.
Well, that's pretty bad,
because that makes it sound like if
I keep on bringing up more oceans,
I'm eventually going to
just increase memory usage,
and eventually my app is
going to get terminated,
and my users are going
to see this as a crash.
I definitely have to fix this.
On top of that, this doesn't match my
expectations for my app.
I know that I'm using the same amount of
objects to display each of the oceans.
In fact, I expect this to be flat,
and it seems like there's objects being
used for earlier oceans that are sticking
around when I'm displaying later oceans.
Well, I definitely need to fix that.
But how do I go about doing that?
Well,
that's where the rest of the allocations
instruments data comes into play.
What the allocations instrument
is doing is it's recording every
single memory event for every single
object allocated during that trace.
It's recording its allocation,
all the retain and releases,
and then eventually it's free.
It's a lot of data.
That's why the app runs a bit slower
on your iPad when you're recording with
the allocations instrument turned on.
Down here it displays the
different categories of objects
that have been allocated.
And to show you what's in here,
let me filter out.
I go to the search field
and I type in string.
And this shows me all the different
types of strings that I've allocated.
If we look specifically
at immutable CFStrings,
we'll see that 20,202 of
them have been allocated and
that at the end of the trace,
there are 3,525 that are still living.
Those are the key numbers
you should pay attention to.
Also, if I focus in right
here and I press that,
it shows me the number of
strings that have been allocated.
I now get a list of actually
all of those instances.
But specifically to know which
instances of all the ones
I've allocated I'm showing,
I actually look over here
at the allocation lifespan
on the left-hand side,
and I'm currently selected
created and still living.
So these are all the immutable
CFStrings that were created during
my complete trace that are still
living at the end of the trace.
If I instead click on
created and destroyed,
now the list will be updated to
show me those instances that were
created but have already been
destroyed before the trace ends.
It went by so quickly that I can't tell.
There we go.
It updated.
There's a lot of them.
Okay.
Well, for my analysis, I'm worried about
objects that are created.
And I expected them to be destroyed,
but unfortunately they're still living.
So I'm going to switch it back
to created and still living.
And I'm going to go back
to my object summary.
And I'm not going to search for strings.
And now I'm presented with all these
different types of objects again.
Now where do I go from here?
Well, this can really feel like trying to
find a needle in a haystack because
we're presenting so much information.
Well, the best way to go about using
this is to think about -- actually,
pick an object in your own code
and check to see if the data
recorded about its object lifespan
matches your own expectations.
So I'm going to do that specifically
for the Ocean View class in my app.
Great.
There it is.
All right, and now what I have here
is this is presented to me.
I create an ocean view every time an
ocean is displayed on the iPad screen,
and then when I swipe away,
it should go away.
So let's see what it's telling me.
What it's telling me that I've
created three of them overall.
That makes sense.
That's what I expected.
But it's unfortunately telling
me that there's three living
at the end of the trace.
Well, that's not what I expected.
In fact,
what I expected was what we're seeing
for ocean view controller right above,
that I had three total,
but at the end of the trace,
I have one that's still living.
So now I need to figure out
why I still have -- why these
ocean views are still alive.
Let me click on here to get to there.
And you'll see that now I have
a list of all my OceanViews.
If I scroll through these,
you'll see that the inspection
head moves to the point in time
when each of them got allocated.
Well, now I need to click on
the first instance again.
And now this brings up the
complete memory history
for the OceanView instance.
Starting from its initial allocation,
that gets me a ref count of one,
followed by retain and releases
that increase the ref count.
That's the key number
here in this column.
And eventually,
this should get all the way down to zero,
and it'll get freed.
But it's not getting freed
because it never gets to zero.
So who's holding a reference to this?
Well,
the best way to find out is to move the
inspection head along in the timeline
to a point in time where I expect that
ocean view to have already been freed.
How about right here where
the second ocean is displayed?
At that point in time,
the memory events being recorded are
retain and releases from NSFireTimer.
Well, that's the timer that Joe was
mentioning was telling the
ocean view to animate itself.
That's weird.
I don't expect this to be happening.
So for some reason,
the timer hasn't released its
reference to my ocean view.
I need to go back to the very beginning
and find out when that ocean view got
its initial reference to my ocean view.
So I've got a reference to my ocean view.
Well,
that seems like it happens right here.
If I bring up the extended detail view,
I'll see that that is -- okay.
Well, basically,
what's happening here is that this
is being called from start animation
in my own code in the ocean view.
So now I'm going to go back to
Xcode and take a look at that code.
And I'm going to look
for start animation.
I see that in start animation,
I am creating the timer and it's
passing itself as the target.
And stop animation right down
here is correctly invalidating
the animation timer.
So I need to find out why I'm not
calling stop animation at the right time.
So if I do that,
I see that I'm actually
not calling at all.
I have a declaration, a definition,
and no call to it.
So that's wrong.
So I now know that I need to
match my stop animation call with
where I call start animation,
and it should be right here
in view will disappear,
which gets called when
I swipe away the ocean.
So let me fix that,
and I'm going to run this again
in Instruments to verify that
I've made the correct fixes.
So let me pick the leaks profile,
and I'm going to be recording here again.
Okay, let me bring it up.
I'm going to highlight ocean view.
And sure enough,
there are no ocean views being displayed,
being recorded.
And I went to an ocean,
and now I do have an ocean view.
So that's good.
Now let me see if I swipe away
from the ocean if it goes away.
All right, it did.
Good.
I think I fixed something.
Let me do it again.
Well, actually,
I don't have time for that,
so I'm going to stop this.
The other thing to note is that it
looks like as I bring up more oceans,
the amount of memory I'm
using is not going up.
You'll see that I'm hovering
it around 1.12 megabytes,
so that's really good.
This is an iterative process,
and this is only the beginning.
I really need to verify all of
the object lifespans for all my
different classes to figure out how
best to fix all of my memory issues.
But that's basically the leaks instrument
and the allocations instrument.
Applause
So what have I shown you?
I showed you how to use the leaks
instrument and specifically the
cycles and routes to identify
retained cycles in your code.
And secondly,
I used allocations to determine why
memory was increasing over time and
specifically checking my assumptions
about the lifespan of my objects.
And now I'd like to return
the floor back to Dave.
Thank you, Dave.
So what you saw on stage was Victor and
Joe following the profile process.
They reproduced a problem,
they measured it with Instruments,
came up with a theory about
what changes they could make
to actually cause a change,
made those changes,
and then went back and reverified that
they'd actually fixed the problem.
This is a critical process.
If you follow it, you'll have results.
The instruments templates used
was we used Time Profiler,
for which Joe found three
improvements fairly easily,
a startup time improvement,
a drawing animation improvement,
and we fixed an async problem
or a synchronous problem that
was blocking the main thread.
And Victor managed to find
two memory leak improvements
by using the leaks template.
This is by no means
the end of instruments.
We can profile virtually
anything on the operating system.
And if you read the documentation
or look at the library thing,
we have over 35 instruments that
can profile different aspects,
core profile, core animation, GCDQs.
Come see us in the labs.
We can tell you if you are
having a particular problem
with a particular subsystem,
there's probably an instrument that
will illuminate the data and what
your application is doing with it.
If you do the profile process,
these are the reviews that you're going
to get on your app on the App Store.
Fantastic and fast.
Must buy this app.
And the ratings are going
to be radically different.
If you need more information,
I encourage you to
contact Michael Jurowicz.
Instruments documentation
is included with Xcode and,
of course, the Apple Developer Form.
There's a vibrant community discussing
instruments on the Apple Developer Form.
I appreciate everyone's time and
have an excellent conference.